     SPRING

     Spring, the sweet Spring, is the year's pleasant king;
     Then blooms each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
     Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing,
     Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

     The palm and may make country houses gay,
     Lambs frisk and play, the shepherds pipe all day,
     And we hear aye birds tune their merry lay,
       Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

     The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet,
     Young lovers meet, old wives a-sunning sit,
     In every street these tunes our ears do greet,
       Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!
          Spring, the sweet Spring!

    







     SUMMONS TO LOVE

     Phoebus, arise!
     And paint the sable skies
     With azure, white, and red:
     Rouse Memnon's mother from her Tithon's bed
     That she may thy career with roses spread:
     The nightingales thy coming eachwhere sing:
     Make an eternal spring!
     Give life to this dark world which lieth dead;
     Spread forth thy golden hair
     In larger locks than thou wast wont before,
     And emperor-like decore
     With diadem of pearl thy temples fair:
     Chase hence the ugly night
     Which serves but to make dear thy glorious light.

     —This is that happy morn,
     That day, long wishéd day
     Of all my life so dark,
     (If cruel stars have not my ruin sworn
     And fates not hope betray),
     Which, purely white, deserves
     An everlasting diamond should it mark.
     This is the morn should bring unto this grove
     My Love, to hear and recompense my love.
     Fair King, who all preserves,
     But show thy blushing beams,
     And thou two sweeter eyes
     Shalt see than those which by Penéus' streams
     Did once thy heart surprize.
     Now, Flora, deck thyself in fairest guise:
     If that ye winds would hear
     A voice surpassing far Amphion's lyre,
     Your furious chiding stay;
     Let Zephyr only breathe
     And with her tresses play.
     —The winds all silent are,
     And Phoebus in his chair
     Ensaffroning sea and air
     Makes vanish every star:
     Night like a drunkard reels
     Beyond the hills, to shun his flaming wheels:
     The fields with flowers are deck'd in every hue,
     The clouds with orient gold spangle their blue;
     Here is the pleasant place—
     And nothing wanting is, save She, alas.

     






     TIME AND LOVE

     When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
     The rich proud cost of out-worn buried age;
     When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed,
     And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.

     When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
     Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
     And the firm soil win of the watery main,
     Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.

     When I have seen such interchange of state,
     Or state itself confounded to decay,
     Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate—
     That Time will come and take my Love away.

     —This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
     But weep to have that which it fears to lose.

    
     Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
     But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
     How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
     Whose action is no stronger than a flower?

     O how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
     Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
     When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
     Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?

     O fearful meditation, where, alack!
     Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
     Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
     Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?

     O! none, unless this miracle have might,
     That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

     








     THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE

     Come live with me and be my Love,
     And we will all the pleasures prove
     That hills and valleys, dale and field,
     And all the craggy mountains yield.

     There will we sit upon the rocks
     And see the shepherds feed their flocks
     By shallow rivers, to whose falls
     Melodious birds sing madrigals.

     There will I make thee beds of roses
     And a thousand fragrant posies,
     A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
     Embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle.

     A gown made of the finest wool,
     Which from our pretty lambs we pull,
     Fair-lined slippers for the cold,
     With buckles of the purest gold.

     A belt of straw and ivy-buds
     With coral clasps and amber studs:
     And if these pleasures may thee move,
     Come live with me and be my Love.

     Thy silver dishes for thy meat
     As precious as the gods do eat,
     Shall on an ivory table be
     Prepared each day for thee and me.

     The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
     For thy delight each May-morning:
     If these delights thy mind may move,
     Then live with me and be my Love.

     







       A MADRIGAL

       Crabbed Age and Youth
       Cannot live together:
       Youth is full of pleasance,
       Age is full of care;
       Youth like summer morn,
       Age like winter weather;
       Youth like summer brave,
       Age like winter bare:
       Youth is full of sport,
       Age's breath is short,
       Youth is nimble, Age is lame:
       Youth is hot and bold,
       Age is weak and cold;
       Youth is wild, and Age is tame:—
       Age, I do abhor thee,
       Youth, I do adore thee;
       O! my Love, my Love is young!
       Age, I do defy thee—
       O, sweet shepherd, hie thee,
       For methinks thou stay'st too long.

    

       Under the greenwood tree
       Who loves to lie with me,
       And tune his merry note
       Unto the sweet bird's throat—
     Come hither, come hither, come hither!
          Here shall we see
          No enemy
     But winter and rough weather.

       Who doth ambition shun
       And loves to live i' the sun,
       Seeking the food he eats
       And pleased with what he gets—
     Come hither, come hither, come hither!
          Here shall he see
          No enemy
     But winter and rough weather.


     It was a lover and his lass
       With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonino!
     That o'er the green cornfield did pass,
     In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
     When birds do sing hey ding a ding:
       Sweet lovers love the Spring.
     Between the acres of the rye
     These pretty country folks would lie:
     This carol they began that hour,
     How that life was but a flower:
     And therefore take the present time
       With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonino!
     For love is crownéd with the prime
     In spring time, the only pretty ring time,
     When birds do sing, hey ding a ding;
       Sweet lovers love the Spring.













    PRESENT IN ABSENCE

     Absence, hear thou my protestation
          Against thy strength,
          Distance, and length:
     Do what thou canst for alteration:
       For hearts of truest mettle
     Absence doth join, and Time doth settle.

     Who loves a mistress of such quality,
          He soon hath found
          Affection's ground
     Beyond time, place, and all mortality.
       To hearts that cannot vary
     Absence is Presence, Time doth tarry.

     By absence this good means I gain,
          That I can catch her,
          Where none can watch her,
     In some close corner of my brain:
       There I embrace and kiss her,
     And so I both enjoy and miss her.












     ABSENCE

     Being your slave what should I do but tend
     Upon the hours and times of your desire?
     I have no precious time at all to spend,
     Nor services to do, till you require:

     Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
     Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
     Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
     When you have bid your servant once adieu:

     Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
     Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
     But like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
     Save where you are, how happy you make those;—

     So true a fool is love, that in your will,
     Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.

     How like a winter hath my absence been
     From Thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
     What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen,
     What old December's bareness everywhere!

     And yet this time removed was summer's time:
     The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
     Bearing the wanton burden of the prime
     Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:

     Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
     But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
     For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
     And, thou away, the very birds are mute;

     Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
     That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.








     A CONSOLATION

     When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes
     I all alone beweep my outcast state,
     And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
     And look upon myself, and curse my fate;

     Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
     Featured like him, like him with friends possest,
     Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
     With what I most enjoy contented least;

     Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
     Haply I think on Thee—and then my state,
     Like to the lark at break of day arising
     From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;

     For thy sweet love remember'd, such wealth brings
     That then I scorn to change my state with kings.










    THE UNCHANGEABLE

     O never say that I was false of heart,
     Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify:
     As easy might I from my self depart
     As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie;

     That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
     Like him that travels, I return again,
     Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
     So that myself bring water for my stain.

     Never believe, though in my nature reign'd
     All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
     That it could so preposterously be stain'd
     To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:

     For nothing this wide universe I call,
     Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.

     To me, fair Friend, you never can be old,
     For as you were when first your eye I eyed
     Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
     Have from the forests shook three summers' pride;

     Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
     In process of the seasons have I seen,
     Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
     Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.

     Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,
     Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
     So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
     Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived:

     For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred,—
     Ere you were born, was beauty's summer dead.









     DIAPHENIA

        Diaphenia like the daffadowndilly,
        White as the sun, fair as the lily,
      Heigh ho, how do I love thee!
        I do love thee as my lambs
        Are belovéd of their dams;
     How blest were I if thou would'st prove me.

        Diaphenia like the spreading roses,
        That in thy sweets all sweets encloses,
      Fair sweet, how do I love thee!
        I do love thee as each flower
        Loves the sun's life-giving power;
     For dead, thy breath to life might move me.

        Diaphenia like to all things blesséd
        When all thy praises are expresséd,
      Dear joy, how do I love thee!
        As the birds do love the spring,
        Or the bees their careful king:
     Then in requite, sweet virgin, love me!










     ROSALINE

     Like to the clear in highest sphere
     Where all imperial glory shines,
     Of selfsame colour is her hair
     Whether unfolded, or in twines:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her eyes are sapphires set in snow,
     Resembling heaven by every wink;
     The Gods do fear whenas they glow,
     And I do tremble when I think
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Her cheeks are like the blushing cloud
     That beautifies Aurora's face,
     Or like the silver crimson shroud
     That Phoebus' smiling looks doth grace;
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her lips are like two budded roses
     Whom ranks of lilies neighbour nigh,
     Within which bounds she balm encloses
     Apt to entice a deity:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Her neck like to a stately tower
     Where Love himself imprison'd lies,
     To watch for glances every hour
     From her divine and sacred eyes:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her paps are centres of delight,
     Her breasts are orbs of heavenly frame,
     Where Nature moulds the dew of light
     To feed perfection with the same:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     With orient pearl, with ruby red,
     With marble white, with sapphire blue,
     Her body every way is fed,
     Yet soft in touch and sweet in view:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Nature herself her shape admires;
     The Gods are wounded in her sight;
     And Love forsakes his heavenly fires
     And at her eyes his brand doth light:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Then muse not, Nymphs, though I bemoan
     The absence of fair Rosaline,
     Since for a fair there's fairer none,
     Nor for her virtues so divine:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Heigh ho, my heart! would God that she were mine!










     COLIN

     Beauty sat bathing by a spring
      Where fairest shades did hide her;
     The winds blew calm, the birds did sing,
      The cool streams ran beside her.

     My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye
      To see what was forbidden:
     But better memory said, fie!
      So vain desire was chidden:—
          Hey nonny nonny O!
          Hey nonny nonny!

     Into a slumber then I fell,
     When fond imagination
     Seeméd to see, but could not tell
     Her feature or her fashion.
     But ev'n as babes in dreams do smile,
     And sometimes fall a-weeping,
     So I awaked as wise this while
     As when I fell a-sleeping:—
          Hey nonny nonny O!
          Hey nonny nonny!










     TO HIS LOVE

     Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
     Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
     Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
     And summer's lease hath all too short a date:

     Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
     And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
     And every fair from fair sometime declines,
     By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimm'd.

     But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
     Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
     Nor shall death brag thou wanderest in his shade,
     When in eternal lines to time thou growest.

     So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
     So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.











     TO HIS LOVE

     When in the chronicle of wasted time
     I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
     And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
     In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights;

     Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best
     Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
     I see their antique pen would have exprest
     Ev'n such a beauty as you master now.

     So all their praises are but prophecies
     Of this our time, all, you prefiguring;
     And for they look'd but with divining eyes,
     They had not skill enough your worth to sing:

     For we, which now behold these present days,
     Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.









     LOVE'S PERJURIES

     On a day, alack the day!
     Love, whose month is ever May,
     Spied a blossom passing fair
     Playing in the wanton air:
     Through the velvet leaves the wind
     All unseen 'gan passage find;
     That the lover, sick to death,
     Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
     Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
     Air, would I might triumph so!
     But, alack, my hand is sworn
     Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn:
     Vow, alack, for youth unmeet;
     Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
     Do not call it sin in me
     That I am forsworn for thee:
     Thou for whom e'en Jove would swear
     Juno but an Ethiope were,
     And deny himself for Jove,
     Turning mortal for thy love.















     A SUPPLICATION

     Forget not yet the tried intent
     Of such a truth as I have meant;
     My great travail so gladly spent,
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not yet when first began
     The weary life ye know, since whan
     The suit, the service, none tell can;
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not yet the great assays,
     The cruel wrong, the scornful ways,
     The painful patience in delays,
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not! O, forget not this,
     How long ago hath been, and is
     The mind that never meant amiss—
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not then thine own approved
     The which so long hath thee so loved,
     Whose steadfast faith yet never moved—
                       Forget not this!















     TO AURORA

     O if thou knew'st how thou thyself does harm,
     And dost prejudge thy bliss, and spoil thy rest;
     Then thou would'st melt the ice out of thy breast
     And thy relenting heart would kindly warm.

     O if thy pride did not our joys controul,
     What world of loving wonders should'st thou see!
     For if I saw thee once transform'd in me,
     Then in thy bosom I would pour my soul;

     Then all my thoughts should in thy visage shine,
     And if that aught mischanced thou should'st not moan
     Nor bear the burthen of thy griefs alone;
     No, I would have my share in what were thine:

     And whilst we thus should make our sorrows one,
     This happy harmony would make them none.












     TRUE LOVE

     Let me not to the marriage of true minds
     Admit impediments. Love is not love
     Which alters when it alteration finds,
     Or bends with the remover to remove:—

     O no! it is an ever-fixéd mark
     That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
     It is the star to every wandering bark
     Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.

     Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
     Within his bending sickle's compass come;
     Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
     But bears it out ev'n to the edge of doom:—

     If this be error and upon me proved,
     I never writ, nor no man ever loved.










     A DITTY

     My true love hath my heart, and I have his,
     By just exchange one to the other given:
     I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss,
     There never was a better bargain driven:
      My true love hath my heart, and I have his.

     His heart in me keeps him and me in one,
     My heart in him his thoughts and senses guides:
     He loves my heart, for once it was his own,
     I cherish his because in me it bides:
      My true-love hath my heart, and I have his.











     LOVE'S OMNIPRESENCE

     Were I as base as is the lowly plain,
     And you, my Love, as high as heaven above,
     Yet should the thoughts of me your humble swain
     Ascend to heaven, in honour of my Love.

     Were I as high as heaven above the plain,
     And you, my Love, as humble and as low
     As are the deepest bottoms of the main,
     Whereso'er you were, with you my love should go.

     Were you the earth, dear Love, and I the skies,
     My love should shine on you like to the sun,
     And look upon you with ten thousand eyes
     Till heaven wax'd blind, and till the world were done.

     Whereso'er I am, below, or else above you,
     Whereso'er you are, my heart shall truly love you.












     CARPE DIEM

     O Mistress mine, where are you roaming?
     O, stay and hear! your true-love's coming
        That can sing both high and low;
     Trip no further, pretty sweeting,
     Journeys end in lovers' meeting—
        Every wise man's son doth know.

     What is love? 'tis not hereafter;
     Present mirth hath present laughter;
        What's to come is still unsure:
     In delay there lies no plenty,—
     Then come kiss me, Sweet-and-twenty,
        Youth's a stuff will not endure.










     WINTER

     When icicles hang by the wall
      And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
     And Tom bears logs into the hall,
      And milk comes frozen home in pail;
     When blood is nipt, and ways be foul,
     Then nightly sings the staring owl
                 Tuwhoo!
     Tuwhit! Tuwhoo! A merry note!
     While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

     When all around the wind doth blow,
      And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
     And birds sit brooding in the snow,
      And Marian's nose looks red and raw:
     When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl—
     Then nightly sings the staring owl
                 Tuwhoo!
     Tuwhit! Tuwhoo! A merry note!
     While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

     



     That time of year thou may'st in me behold
     When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
     Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
     Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.

     In me thou seest the twilight of such day
     As after sunset fadeth in the west,
     Which by and by black night doth take away,
     Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.

     In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
     That on the ashes of his youth doth lie
     As the deathbed whereon it must expire,
     Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.

     —This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
     To love that well which thou must leave ere long.










     REMEMBRANCE

     When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
     I summon up remembrance of things past,
     I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
     And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste

     Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
     For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
     And weep afresh love's long-since-cancell'd woe,
     And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight.

     Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
     And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
     The sad account of fore-bemoanéd moan,
     Which I new pay as if not paid before:

     —But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
     All losses are restored, and sorrows end.












     REVOLUTIONS

     Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore
     So do our minutes hasten to their end;
     Each changing place with that which goes before,
     In sequent toil all forwards do contend.

     Nativity once in the main of light
     Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
     Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
     And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.

     Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
     And delves the parallels in beauty's brow;
     Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
     And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.

     And yet, to times in hope, my verse shall stand
     Praising Thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

     





     Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
     And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
     The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing,
     My bonds in thee are all determinate.

     For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
     And for that riches where is my deserving?
     The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
     And so my patent back again is swerving.

     Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
     Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
     So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
     Comes home again, on better judgement making.

     Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter;
     In sleep, a king; but waking, no such matter.










     THE LIFE WITHOUT PASSION

     They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
     That do not do the thing they most do show,
     Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
     Unmovéd, cold, and to temptation slow,—

     They rightly do inherit Heaven's graces,
     And husband nature's riches from expense;
     They are the lords and owners of their faces,
     Others, but stewards of their excellence.

     The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
     Though to itself it only live and die;
     But if that flower with base infection meet,
     The basest weed outbraves his dignity:

     For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
     Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.














     THE LOVER'S APPEAL

       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay! for shame,
       To save thee from the blame
       Of all my grief and grame.
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       That hath loved thee so long
       In wealth and woe among:
       And is thy heart so strong
       As for to leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       That hath given thee my heart
       Never for to depart
       Neither for pain nor smart:
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       And have no more pity
       Of him that loveth thee?
       Alas! thy cruelty!
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!














     THE NIGHTINGALE

     As it fell upon a day
     In the merry month of May,
     Sitting in a pleasant shade
     Which a grove of myrtles made,
     Beasts did leap and birds did sing,
     Trees did grow and plants did spring,
     Every thing did banish moan
     Save the Nightingale alone.
     She, poor bird, as all forlorn,
     Lean'd her breast against a thorn,
     And there sung the dolefullest ditty,
     That to hear it was great pity.
     Fie, fie, fie, now would she cry;
     Tereu, tereu, by and by:
     That to hear her so complain
     Scarce I could from tears refrain;
     For her griefs so lively shown
     Made me think upon mine own.
     —Ah! thought I, thou mourn'st in vain,
     None takes pity on thy pain:
     Senseless trees, they cannot hear thee,
     Ruthless beasts, they will not cheer thee;
     King Pandion, he is dead,
     All thy friends are lapp'd in lead:
     All thy fellow birds do sing
     Careless of thy sorrowing:
     Even so, poor bird, like thee,
     None alive will pity me.

     








     Care-charmer Sleep, son of the sable Night,
     Brother to Death, in silent darkness born,
     Relieve my anguish, and restore the light;
     With dark forgetting of my care return.

     And let the day be time enough to mourn
     The shipwreck of my ill adventured youth:
     Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn,
     Without the torment of the night's untruth.

     Cease, dreams, the images of day-desires,
     To model forth the passions of the morrow;
     Never let rising Sun approve you liars
     To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow:

     Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
     And never wake to feel the day's disdain.













     MADRIGAL

        Take O take those lips away
        That so sweetly were forsworn,
        And those eyes, the break of day,
        Lights that do mislead the morn:
        But my kisses bring again,
                  Bring again—
        Seals of love, but seal'd in vain,
                  Seal'd in vain!
















     LOVE'S FAREWELL

     Since there's no help, come let us kiss and part,—
     Nay, I have done, you get no more of me;
     And I am glad, yea glad with all my heart,
     That thus so cleanly I myself can free;

     Shake hands for ever, cancel all our vows,
     And when we meet at any time again,
     Be it not seen in either of our brows
     That we one jot of former love retain.

     Now at the last gasp of love's latest breath,
     When his pulse failing, passion speechless lies,
     When faith is kneeling by his bed of death,
     And innocence is closing up his eyes,

     —Now if thou wouldst, when all have given him over,
     From death to life thou might'st him yet recover!

















    TO HIS LUTE

     My lute, be as thou wert when thou did'st grow
     With thy green mother in some shady grove,
     When immelodious winds but made thee move,
     And birds their ramage did on thee bestow.

     Since that dear Voice which did thy sounds approve,
     Which wont in such harmonious strains to flow,
     Is reft from Earth to tune those spheres above,
     What art thou but a harbinger of woe?

     Thy pleasing notes be pleasing notes no more,
     But orphan's wailings to the fainting ear;
     Each stroke a sigh, each sound draws forth a tear;
     For which be silent as in woods before:

     Or if that any hand to touch thee deign,
     Like widow'd turtle still her loss complain.


















     BLIND LOVE

     O me! what eyes hath love put in my head
     Which have no correspondence with true sight:
     Or if they have, where is my judgment fled
     That censures falsely what they see aright?

     If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
     What means the world to say it is not so?
     If it be not, then love doth well denote,
     Love's eye is not so true as all men's: No,

     How can it? O how can love's eye be true,
     That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?
     No marvel then though I mistake my view:
     The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.

     O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
     Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find!














     THE UNFAITHFUL SHEPHERDESS

     While that the sun with his beams hot
     Scorchéd the fruits in vale and mountain,
     Philon the shepherd, late forgot,
     Sitting beside a crystal fountain,
       In shadow of a green oak tree
       Upon his pipe this song play'd he:
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     So long as I was in your sight
     I was your heart, your soul, and treasure;
     And evermore you sobb'd and sigh'd
     Burning in flames beyond all measure:
       —Three days endured your love to me,
       And it was lost in other three!
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     Another Shepherd you did see
     To whom your heart was soon enchainéd;
     Full soon your love was leapt from me,
     Full soon my place he had obtainéd.
       Soon came a third, your love to win,
       And we were out and he was in.
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     Sure you have made me passing glad
     That you your mind so soon removéd,
     Before that I the leisure had
     To choose you for my best belovéd:
       For all your love was past and done
       Two days before it was begun:—
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

















     A RENUNCIATION

     If women could be fair, and yet not fond,
     Or that their love were firm, not fickle still,
     I would not marvel that they make men bond
     By service long to purchase their good will;
     But when I see how frail those creatures are,
     I muse that men forget themselves so far.

     To mark the choice they make, and how they change,
     How oft from Phoebus they do flee to Pan;
     Unsettled still, like haggards wild they range,
     These gentle birds that fly from man to man;
     Who would not scorn and shake them from the fist,
     And let them fly, fair fools, which way they list?

     Yet for disport we fawn and flatter both,
     To pass the time when nothing else can please,
     And train them to our lure with subtle oath,
     Till, weary of their wiles, ourselves we ease;
     And then we say when we their fancy try,
     To play with fools, O what a fool was I!

    








          Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
          Thou art not so unkind
          As man's ingratitude;
          Thy tooth is not so keen,
          Because thou art not seen,
          Although thy breath be rude.
     Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! unto the green holly:
     Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
          Then, heigh ho! the holly!
          This life is most jolly.

          Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
          That dost not bite so nigh
          As benefits forgot:
          Though thou the waters warp,
          Thy sting is not so sharp
          As friend remember'd not.
     Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! unto the green holly:
     Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
          Then heigh ho, the holly!
          This life is most jolly.




















    MADRIGAL

          My thoughts hold mortal strife;
          I do detest my life,
          And with lamenting cries
          Peace to my soul to bring
     Oft call that prince which here doth monarchise:
     —But he, grim grinning King,
     Who caitiffs scorns, and doth the blest surprise,
     Late having deck'd with beauty's rose his tomb,
     Disdains to crop a weed, and will not come.















     DIRGE OF LOVE

       Come away, come away, Death,
     And in sad cypres let me be laid;
       Fly away, fly away, breath;
     I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
     My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
          O prepare it!
     My part of death no one so true
          Did share it.

       Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
     On my black coffin let there be strown;
       Not a friend, not a friend greet
     My poor corpse, where my bones shall thrown:
     A thousand thousand sighs to save,
          Lay me, O where
     Sad true lover never find my grave,
          To weep there.












     FIDELE

     Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
        Nor the furious winter's rages:
     Thou thy worldly task hast done,
        Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
     Golden lads and girls all must,
     As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.

     Fear no more the frown o' the great,
        Thou art past the tyrant's stroke;
     Care no more to clothe and eat;
        To thee the reed is as the oak:
     The sceptre, learning, physic, must
     All follow this, and come to dust.

     Fear no more the lightning flash
        Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
     Fear not slander, censure rash;
        Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
     All lovers young, all lovers must
     Consign to thee, and come to dust.















     A SEA DIRGE

     Full fathom five thy father lies:
        Of his bones are coral made;
     Those are pearls that were his eyes:
        Nothing of him that doth fade,
     But doth suffer a sea-change
     Into something rich and strange;
     Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
     Hark! now I hear them,—
        Ding, dong, Bell.










    A LAND DIRGE

     Call for the robin-redbreast and the wren,
     Since o'er shady groves they hover
     And with leaves and flowers do cover
     The friendless bodies of unburied men.
     Call unto his funeral dole
     The ant, the field-mouse, and the mole
     To rear him hillocks that shall keep him warm
     And (when gay tombs are robb'd) sustain no harm;
     But keep the wolf far thence, that's foe to men,
     For with his nails he'll dig them up again.

















     POST MORTEM

     If Thou survive my well-contented day
     When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
     And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
     These poor rude lines of thy deceaséd lover:

     Compare them with the bettering of the time,
     And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
     Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme
     Exceeded by the height of happier men.

     O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought—
     "Had my friend's muse grown with this growing age,
     A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
     To march in ranks of better equipage:

     But since he died, and poets better prove,
     Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."















     THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH

     No longer mourn for me when I am dead
     Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
     Give warning to the world, that I am fled
     From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell;

     Nay, if you read this line, remember not
     The hand that writ it; for I love you so,
     That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
     If thinking on me then should make you woe.

     O if, I say, you look upon this verse
     When I perhaps compounded am with clay
     Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
     But let your love even with my life decay;

     Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
     And mock you with me after I am gone.


















     MADRIGAL

     Tell me where is Fancy bred,
     Or in the heart or in the head?
     How begot, how nourishéd?
          Reply, reply.
     It is engender'd in the eyes,
     With gazing fed; and Fancy dies
     In the cradle where it lies:
     Let us all ring fancy's knell;
     I'll begin it,—Ding, dong, bell.
               —Ding, dong, bell.














     CUPID AND CAMPASPE

     Cupid and my Campaspe play'd
     At cards for kisses; Cupid paid:
     He stakes his quiver, bow, and arrows,
     His mother's doves, and team of sparrows;
     Loses them too; then down he throws
     The coral of his lip, the rose
     Growing on's cheek (but none knows how);
     With these, the crystal of his brow,
     And then the dimple on his chin;
     All these did my Campaspe win:
     At last he set her both his eyes—
     She won, and Cupid blind did rise.
        O Love! has she done this to thee?
        What shall, alas! become of me?

     








     Pack, clouds, away, and welcome day,
      With night we banish sorrow;
     Sweet air blow soft, mount larks aloft
      To give my Love good-morrow!
     Wings from the wind to please her mind,
      Notes from the lark I'll borrow;
     Bird, prune thy wing, nightingale sing,
      To give my Love good-morrow;
        To give my Love good-morrow
        Notes from them both I'll borrow.

     Wake from thy nest, Robin-redbreast!
      Sing, birds, in every furrow;
     And from each hill, let music shrill
      Give my fair Love good-morrow!
     Blackbird and thrush in every bush,
      Stare, linnet, and cock-sparrow!
     You pretty elves, amongst yourselves
      Sing my fair Love good-morrow;
        To give my Love good-morrow
        Sing birds, in every furrow!
















     PROTHALAMION

     Calm was the day, and through the trembling air
     Sweet-breathing Zephyrus did softly play—
     A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay
     Hot Titan's beams, which then did glister fair;
     When I, (whom sullen care,
     Through discontent of my long fruitless stay
     In princes' court, and expectation vain
     Of idle hopes, which still do fly away
     Like empty shadows, did afflict my brain)
     Walk'd forth to ease my pain
     Along the shore of silver-streaming Thames;
     Whose rutty bank, the which his river hems,
     Was painted all with variable flowers,
     And all the meads adorn'd with dainty gems
     Fit to deck maidens' bowers,
     And crown their paramours
     Against the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     There in a meadow by the river's side,
     A flock of nymphs I chancéd to espy,
     All lovely daughters of the flood thereby,
     With goodly greenish locks all loose untied
     As each had been a bride;
     And each one had a little wicker basket
     Made of fine twigs, entrailéd curiously,
     In which they gather'd flowers to fill their flasket,
     And with fine fingers cropt full feateously
     The tender stalks on high.
     Of every sort which in that meadow grew
     They gather'd some; the violet, pallid blue,
     The little daisy that at evening closes,
     The virgin lily and the primrose true:
     With store of vermeil roses,
     To deck their bridegrooms' posies
     Against the bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     With that I saw two swans of goodly hue
     Come softly swimming down along the lee;
     Two fairer birds I yet did never see;
     The snow which doth the top of Pindus strow,
     Did never whiter show,
     Nor Jove himself, when he a swan would be
     For love of Leda, whiter did appear;
     Yet Leda was (they say) as white as he,
     Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near;
     So purely white they were,
     That even the gentle stream, the which them bare,
     Seem'd foul to them, and bade his billows spare
     To wet their silken feathers, lest they might
     Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair,
     And mar their beauties bright
     That shone as Heaven's light
     Against their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Eftsoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill,
     Ran all in haste to see that silver brood
     As they came floating on the crystal flood;
     Whom when they saw, they stood amazéd still
     Their wondering eyes to fill;
     Them seem'd they never saw a sight so fair
     Of fowls, so lovely, that they sure did deem
     Them heavenly born, or to be that same pair
     Which through the sky draw Venus' silver team;
     For sure they did not seem
     To be begot of any earthly seed,
     But rather angels, or of angels' breed;
     Yet were they bred of summer's heat, they say,
     In sweetest season, when each flower and weed
     The earth did fresh array;
     So fresh they seem'd as day,
     Even as their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Then forth they all out of their baskets drew
     Great store of flowers, the honour of the field,
     That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
     All which upon those goodly birds they threw
     And all the waves did strew,
     That like old Peneus' waters they did seem
     When down along by pleasant Tempe's shore
     Scatter'd with flowers, through Thessaly they stream,
     That they appear, through lilies' plenteous store,
     Like a bride's chamber-floor.
     Two of those nymphs meanwhile two garlands bound
     Of freshest flowers which in that mead they found,
     The which presenting all in trim array,
     Their snowy foreheads therewithal they crown'd
     Whilst one did sing this lay
     Prepar'd against that day,
     Against their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     "Ye gentle birds! the world's fair ornament,
     And Heaven's glory, whom this happy hour
     Doth lead unto your lovers' blissful bower,
     Joy may you have, and gentle hearts content
     Of your loves complement;
     And let fair Venus, that is queen of love,
     With her heart-quelling son upon you smile,
     Whose smile, they say, hath virtue to remove
     All love's dislike, and friendship's faulty guile
     For ever to assoil.
     Let endless peace your steadfast hearts accord,
     And blesséd plenty wait upon your board;
     And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound,
     That fruitful issue may to you afford
     Which may your foes confound,
     And make your joys redound
     Upon your bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song."

     So ended she; and all the rest around
     To her redoubled that her undersong,
     Which said their bridal day should not be long:
     And gentle Echo from the neighbour ground
     Their accents did resound.
     So forth those joyous birds did pass along
     Adown the lee that to them murmur'd low,
     As he would speak but that he lack'd a tongue,
     Yet did by signs his glad affection show,
     Making his stream run slow.
     And all the fowl which in his flood did dwell
     'Gan flock about these twain, that did excel
     The rest, so far as Cynthia doth shend
     The lesser stars. So they, enrangéd well,
     Did on those two attend,
     And their best service lend
     Against their wedding day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     At length they all to merry London came,
     To merry London, my most kindly nurse,
     That to me gave this life's first native source,
     Though from another place I take my name,
     An house of ancient fame:
     There when they came whereas those bricky towers
     The which on Thames' broad agéd back do ride,
     Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers,
     There whilome wont the Templar-knights to bide,
     Till they decay'd through pride:
     Next whereunto there stands a stately place,
     Where oft I gainéd gifts and goodly grace
     Of that great lord, which therein wont to dwell,
     Whose want too well now feels my friendless case;
     But ah! here fits not well
     Old woes, but joys to tell
     Against the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer,
     Great England's glory and the world's wide wonder,
     Whose dreadful name late thro' all Spain did thunder,
     And Hercules' two pillars standing near
     Did make to quake and fear:
     Fair branch of honour, flower of chivalry!
     That fillest England with thy triumphs' fame
     Joy have thou of thy noble victory,
     And endless happiness of thine own name
     That promiseth the same;
     That through thy prowess and victorious arms,
     Thy country may be freed from foreign harms,
     And great Eliza's glorious name may ring
     Through all the world, fill'd with thy wide alarms
     Which some brave Muse may sing
     To ages following,
     Upon the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly till I end my song.

     From those high towers this noble lord issúing,
     Like radiant Hesper, when his golden hair
     In th' ocean billows he hath bathéd fair,
     Descended to the river's open viewing
     With a great train ensuing.
     Above the rest were goodly to be seen
     Two gentle knights of lovely face and feature,
     Beseeming well the bower of any queen,
     With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature,
     Fit for so goodly stature,
     That like the twins of Jove they seem'd in sight
     Which deck the baldric of the Heavens bright;
     They two, forth pacing to the river's side,
     Received those two fair brides, their love's delight;
     Which, at th' appointed tide,
     Each one did make his bride
     Against their bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

    


















     THE HAPPY HEART

     Art thou poor, yet hast thou golden slumbers?
          O sweet content!
     Art thou rich, yet is thy mind perplexéd?
          O punishment!
     Dost thou laugh to see how fools are vexéd
     To add to golden numbers, golden numbers?
     O sweet content! O sweet, O sweet content!
     Work apace, apace, apace, apace;
     Honest labour bears a lovely face;
     Then hey nonny nonny, hey nonny nonny!

     Canst drink the waters of the crispéd spring?
          O sweet content!
     Swimm'st thou in wealth, yet sink'st in thine own tears?
          O punishment!
     Then he that patiently want's burden bears,
     No burden bears, but is a king, a king!
     O sweet content! O sweet, O sweet content!
     Work apace, apace, apace, apace;
     Honest labour bears a lovely face;
     Then hey nonny nonny, hey nonny nonny!

    











     This Life, which seems so fair,
     Is like a bubble blown up in the air
     By sporting children's breath,
     Who chase it everywhere
     And strive who can most motion it bequeath.
     And though it sometimes seem of its own might
     Like to an eye of gold to be fix'd there,
     And firm to hover in that empty height,
     That only is because it is so light.
     —But in that pomp it doth not long appear;
     For when 'tis most admiréd, in a thought,
     Because it erst was nought, it turns to nought.

     









     SOUL AND BODY

     Poor Soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
     Fool'd by those rebel powers that thee array,
     Why dost thou pine within, and suffer dearth,
     Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?

     Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
     Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
     Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
     Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?

     Then, Soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
     And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
     Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
     Within be fed, without be rich no more:—

     So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
     And death once dead, there's no more dying then.














     LIFE

     The World's a bubble, and the Life of Man
            Less than a span:
     In his conception wretched, from the womb
            So to the tomb;
     Curst from his cradle, and brought up to years
            With cares and fears.
     Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
     But limns on water, or but writes in dust.

     Yet whilst with sorrow here we live opprest,
            What life is best?
     Courts are but only superficial schools
            To dandle fools:
     The rural parts are turn'd into a den
            Of savage men:
     And where's a city from foul vice so free,
     But may be term'd the worst of all the three?

     Domestic cares afflict the husband's bed,
            Or pains his head:
     Those that live single, take it for a curse,
            Or do things worse:
     Some would have children: those that have them, moan
            Or wish them gone:
     What is it, then, to have, or have no wife,
     But single thraldom, or a double strife?

     Our own affections still at home to please
            Is a disease:
     To cross the seas to any foreign soil,
            Peril and toil:
     Wars with their noise affright us; when they cease,
            We are worse in peace;—
     What then remains, but that we still should cry
     For being born, or, being born, to die















    THE LESSONS OF NATURE

     Of this fair volume which we World do name
     If we the sheets and leaves could turn with care,
     Of Him who it corrects, and did it frame,
     We clear might read the art and wisdom rare:

     Find out His power which wildest powers doth tame,
     His providence extending everywhere,
     His justice which proud rebels doth not spare,
     In every page, no period of the same.

     But silly we, like foolish children, rest
     Well pleased with colour'd vellum, leaves of gold,
     Fair dangling ribbands, leaving what is best,
     On the great Writer's sense ne'er taking hold;

     Or if by chance we stay our minds on aught,
     It is some picture on the margin wrought.

     










     Doth then the world go thus, doth all thus move?
     Is this the justice which on Earth we find?
     Is this that firm decree which all doth bind?
     Are these your influences, Powers above?

     Those souls which vice's moody mists most blind,
     Blind Fortune, blindly, most their friend doth prove;
     And they who thee, poor idle Virtue! love,
     Ply like a feather toss'd by storm and wind.

     Ah! if a Providence doth sway this all,
     Why should best minds groan under most distress?
     Or why should pride humility make thrall,
     And injuries the innocent oppress?

     Heavens! hinder, stop this fate; or grant a time
     When good may have, as well as bad, their prime!

    










     THE WORLD'S WAY

     Tired with all these, for restful death I cry—
     As, to behold desert a beggar born,
     And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
     And purest faith unhappily forsworn,

     And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
     And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
     And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
     And strength by limping sway disabléd

     And art made tongue-tied by authority,
     And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
     And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
     And captive Good attending captain Ill:—

     —Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
     Save that, to die, I leave my Love alone.
